James 3:5, 6 tells us in part:
“The tongue is a small part of the body,
“and yet . . . see how small a fire it takes
“to set a great forest ablaze!
The tongue is also a fire.”
Well, just how small is the tongue?
An average adult’s tongue weighs
only about two and a half ounces (70 g).
That’s a small part of the body weight
of a 200-pound (90 kg) man.
But that little two-ounce tongue
has great power.
If you think about it, it can actually lift
thousands of pounds of weight
—for example, when a chairman
at a convention says, “Please stand.”
Of course, that power
can be used for good or for bad.
And the warning in today’s scripture text:
If we’re not careful,
it can cause great damage,
just like a tiny lighted match
flipped carelessly aside
can burn thousands of acres
of beautiful trees to the ground.
Well, what are types of speech
that can be like a destructive fire?
Lying, slander, backbiting, harmful gossip,
and false teaching
—a few examples.
But during our discussion, let’s talk
about a type of speech
that may be more subtle, more insidious,
but nevertheless is very harmful.
What is it?
Murmuring.
Let’s discuss: “Avoid Murmuring.”
Now, what is murmuring?
According to the dictionary, to murmur
means “to make a low, continuous,
indistinct sound or succession of sounds.”
Of course, in nature,
there are many
very pleasant murmuring sounds.
For example, it’s pleasant to listen
to gentle breezes murmur
through the leaves of trees.
It’s soothing to listen
to a small stream murmuring its way
through a forest or down a mountain slope.
But the same cannot be said
about murmuring by the human tongue.
It is far from pleasant.
One dictionary said that “murmuring by humans
“means complaining
in low mumbling tones, grumbling.”
The Watchtower said
that “the Hebrew term meaning
‘to murmur’ can also mean ‘to growl.’”
When we’re out in service
and if a dog growls at us,
it’s not a pleasant sound that draws us.
We want to distance ourselves.
Of course, murmuring
permeates Satan’s world.
Children murmur against their parents;
wives murmur against their husbands;
employees murmur against their employers;
multitudes murmur against God,
blaming him for bad things that happen.
But, now, here’s an important question,
How does Jehovah view murmuring?
Well, open up to Numbers chapter 12, please,
and here’s an interesting account
that gives us some insight
into Jehovah’s viewpoint
—Numbers 12:1:
“Now Miriam and Aaron
“began to speak against Moses
because of the Cushite wife he had married.”
Verse 2: “They were saying
“[and apparently on an ongoing basis]:
“‘Is it only by Moses
“‘that Jehovah has spoken?
Has he not also spoken through us?’”
Now notice the next thought:
“And Jehovah was listening.”
And Jehovah didn’t like
what he heard, did he?
If you look at verse 9, his “anger burned,”
and he struck Miriam with leprosy.
Now think about this: Of all the diseases
Jehovah could have struck Miriam with,
why did he choose leprosy?
Well, Jehovah doesn’t tell us.
But think about this:
A person struck with leprosy,
especially in Bible times,
was made physically repulsive,
or (you could say) physically ugly.
Well, by talking
the way she was talking already,
she was spiritually repulsive
in Jehovah’s eyes.
So by striking her with leprosy,
Jehovah allowed everyone to see
what Jehovah already saw in Miriam.
There’s another account two chapters later.
It talks about how
the Israelites began to murmur
after hearing the negative report
from the ten spies.
How did Jehovah react?
He decreed that all the murmurers
20 years of age and over
would never make it to the Promised Land.
They would die in the wilderness.
So, obviously, Jehovah hates murmuring.
You could say that he abominates it.
But now the question is, Why?
Well, let’s briefly discuss three reasons.
One: It breeds discontent
both in ourselves and in others.
Jude 16 speaks of ‘murmurers
complaining about their lot in life.’
And it’s true that the more
a person complains about his lot in life,
then the deeper
the discontent becomes in his own heart.
And since murmurers
never keep their complaints to themselves,
it sows discontent in others.
And if you think about this:
Who was the original promoter
of discontent with one’s lot in life?
Satan the Devil.
He succeeded
in sowing discontent in Eve’s heart.
So a murmurer is actually
imitating the methods of the Devil,
and apparently a murmurer
reminds Jehovah of his archenemy, Satan.
And that’s certainly something
no wise person wants to do
—to remind Jehovah of Satan.
Well, what is the antidote?
Cultivating contentment.
First Timothy 6:6:
“There is great gain
in godly devotion along with contentment.”
And several scriptures
talk about contentment.
And when we count our blessings
that we have from Jehovah,
we can be content
—can’t we?—
no matter what our circumstances now.
A second reason Jehovah hates it:
It incites hatred,
again, both in our own heart and in others.
Open up to Proverbs chapter 17, please.
And here’s an interesting scripture on this,
Proverbs 17:9:
“Whoever forgives a transgression seeks love,
“but the one who keeps harping on a matter
separates close friends.”
So notice, love should move us to cover over,
forgive, the transgressions of others.
But if we don’t do that and we keep harping
about their transgressions,
murmuring about them,
then hatred for that one
grows in our own heart.
And how does it affect others?
Well, again, it sows hatred in their heart.
The Watchtower
some years ago had a little article
“Why Keep Free from Murmuring?”
And it gave an example.
It says: “Suppose . . . a Christian
starts to complain to you
“about a certain appointed elder
“[about how he
performs his duties, how he] . . .
handles his parts on the platform.”
And it says:
“If you listen to the complainer,
“you can begin to think as he does.
“Then, as you observe the elder,
you could be saying to yourself:
“‘Now that I think [about] it,
“‘what my friend says
about this elder is true.
I never thought of it that way before.’”
Before it didn’t bother you;
now it bothers you.
Eventually, everything the elder does
can be improper in your eyes.
But, now, what is the antidote?
Well, like it said in Proverbs:
“Whoever forgives a transgression seeks love”
—so cultivating love,
making allowances for others,
forgiving them,
not harping about their transgressions,
but forgiving
as we pray and hope Jehovah will do for us.
But, now, the third reason Jehovah hates it:
It manifests pride.
Korah, Dathan, Abiram
—remember they murmured against Moses.
“We have had enough of you!
“The whole assembly is holy, all of them,
“and Jehovah is in their midst.
“Why, then, should you exalt yourselves
above the congregation of Jehovah?”
Their murmuring was an outward expression
of an inward condition—pride.
And we know
how Jehovah reacted in that case.
But, now, what’s the antidote?
Humility, lowliness of mind
—not trying to tear others down
with our talking to elevate ourselves.
But lowliness of mind will protect us.
So we’ve discussed that murmuring
breeds discontent,
incites hatred, manifests pride.
No wonder Jehovah hates it.
But as we said, if we cultivate contentment,
love, and we cultivate humility,
these will serve as antidotes
to our ever becoming murmurers.
And we’ll be successful
in applying Philippians 2:14,
which says:
“Keep doing all things
free from murmuring.”
And it didn’t say most things.
“Keep doing all things
free from murmuring,”
and we’ll prove to Jehovah
that we’re assets in his organization.
He’ll want us in his organization now;
he’ll want us in his new world in the future.